.TH ORCASD 1 "2026-03-17" "Orcas 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
orcasd \- Orcas daemon for local Codex supervision
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B orcasd
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B orcasd
binary is the long-lived Orcas daemon. It owns the local control plane,
maintains workflow state, serves the Unix domain socket used by clients, and
coordinates the upstream Codex worker connection.

The daemon is normally managed by
.BR systemd (1)
through
.I orcas-daemon.service
and is designed to run as a local service rather than a public network daemon.

Orcas records workstreams, work units, assignments, reports, decisions,
proposals, thread state, and turn state in Orcas-native storage. The CLI and
TUI connect to the daemon for inspection and control.

The current daemon owns two live persistence systems: legacy collaboration and
thread or turn mirror state in \fIstate.json\fR, and authority state in
\fIstate.db\fR for authority workstreams, authority work units, and tracked
threads.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/orcas/config.toml
User configuration file.

.TP
.I ~/.local/share/orcas/state.json
Legacy collaboration and thread or turn mirror state.

.TP
.I ~/.local/share/orcas/state.db
Authority workstream, authority work unit, and tracked-thread state.

.TP
.I ~/.local/share/orcas/logs/orcasd.log
Daemon log file.

.TP
.I ${XDG_RUNTIME_DIR}/orcas/orcasd.sock
Local IPC socket used by supervisor clients.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B RUST_LOG
Controls tracing verbosity for the daemon.

.TP
.B ORCAS_CODEX_BIN
Overrides the path to the local Codex binary.

.TP
.B ORCAS_CODEX_LISTEN_URL
Overrides the upstream Codex listen URL.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR orcas (1),
.BR orcas-tui (1),
.BR systemd (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Orcas contributors.
.SH LICENSE
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.
